<article xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook" xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude">
  <info>
    <title>ARBEL</title>
    <titleabbrev>ARBEL</titleabbrev>
    <author>
      <personname>
        <firstname>Zach</firstname>
        <surname>Flynn</surname>
    </personname></author>
    <authorinitials>ZF</authorinitials>
    <revhistory>
      <revision>
        <revnumber>0.0</revnumber>
        <date>December 2, 2019</date>
      </revision>
    </revhistory>
    <copyright>
      <year>2019</year>
      <holder>Zach Flynn</holder>
    </copyright>
    <legalnotice>
      Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 by the Free Software Foundation. A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".
    </legalnotice>
  </info>

  

  <section id="intro">
    <title>Introduction</title>

    <para>
      ARBEL is a Registry-Based Environment and Language. A <emphasis>registry</emphasis> is a data structure where data is located at "registers".  The data in the registers can be other registries or numbers or strings or code.  It is what other languages might call a <emphasis>map</emphasis> or a <emphasis>table</emphasis>.  Registries are the fundamental data type of ARBEL and the language provides many operations to manipulate and recover values from the registries.  ARBEL instructions operate <code>within</code> a certain registry.  The <emphasis>environment</emphasis> (which registers you can access, and so, which objects and instructions are available) is determined by which registry ARBEL is currently operating within.  Instructions themselves are nothing more than a way to instantiate a new (temporary) registry, execute some code inside of it, and write results to the current registry.  
    </para>

    <para>
      From this basic, but flexible, data type ARBEL builds up a useful system for interactively constructing programs and scripts.  It's goal is to be easy to use interactively which is why the syntax is very similar to entering commands on the command line.  There are commands to save the code you have already entered so that you can interactively build scripts.  It also has commands that make it easy to save state and the registries that you have created to disk so that you can pick up where you left off.
    </para>

    <para>
      The language is imperative and does not try to avoid side-effects (the whole point is to modify the current state of the registry and, perhaps, save it to disk), it is dynamically-typed (registers do not have types, only the values entered in the registries do), and it is strongly typed (values have a certain type and cannot be coerced to other types except explicitly).
    </para>
    
    <para>
      The best way to get a feel for the language and environment is by example so I will stop the rambling about what the language is like and cut to the code.
    </para>
  </section>

  <section id="basics">
    <title>The Basics</title>

    <para>
      
    </para>
  </section>

</article>
