.\" Copyright (C) Zach Flynn, 2020  
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH BRIPLE 1 2020-01-13 
.SH NAME
BRIPLE \- A Registry Based Language and Environment
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B briple [-l FILE] [-s FILE] [-c FILE] [-n] [-m] [-d] [-v]

.SH DESCRIPTION

BRIPLE is an programming language and environment for manipulating data
in registries.  For full documentation on the language itself, see
the manual at: http://zflynn.com/briple/briple.html . This manpage
describes the options for the interpreter.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-l " " FILE
Execute the BRIPLE code in FILE before starting the BRIPLE interpreter
.TP
.BR \-s " " FILE
Execute the BRIPLE code in FILE after any code was loaded by the
.BR \-l
option and exit afterwards.
.TP
.BR \-c " " FILE
The same as \-s except that the first line of the file is treated as a
comment no matter what it contains (so the sha-bang shell script
syntax will work).  Start files with #!/path/to/briple -c and make them
executable to run as a script.
.TP
.BR \-p " " PORT
Run BRIPLE in Socket mode.  Allows you to send commands to the BRIPLE environment through a port specified in the option.
.TP
.BR \-n
Do not start the interpreter.  Only useful with an
.BR \-l
option
.TP
.BR \-m
Do not print any information (the results of a command, etc) unless
there is an explicit call to BRIPLE's
.B print
operation.
.TP
.BR \-d
Do not save the code that you enter in the interpreter.
.TP
.BR \-v
Print out BRIPLE version string and exit.
.TP
.BR \-u
Builds and installs a BRIPLE package with a Make.briple file in current directory

.SH FILES
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH BUGS
Please report any bugs at http://github.com/flynnzac/briple

.SH AUTHOR
Zach Flynn <zlflynn@gmail.com>
